.TH GRC 1 "2026-07-13" "grcrs" "Generic Colouriser 1.13"
.SH NAME
grc \- frontend for the generic colouriser
.BR grcat "(1)"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B grc
.I [options] "command [args]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR grc
executes
.I "command"
with optional parameters
.I "[args]"
and pipes its stdout or stderr into
.BR grcat
with the matching configuration file, colourising the output. If no
configuration matches, the command runs uncoloured.
.PP
This is a faithful Rust port of grc (Generic Colouriser 1.13). It ships two
binaries \(em
.BR grc ,
the launcher documented here, and
.BR grcat "(1),"
the colouriser.
.PP
The grcat configuration file is chosen by scanning
.I grc.conf
files. The following are searched, lowest to highest precedence:
.RS
.nf
/etc/grc.conf
/usr/local/etc/grc.conf
/opt/homebrew/etc/grc.conf
$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/grc/grc.conf
~/.grc/grc.conf
.fi
.RE
.PP
Format of
.IR grc.conf :
each entry consists of two lines; between entries there can be any number of
empty lines or lines beginning with # (comments). The first line is a regular
expression, the second the name of the
.BR grcat
configuration file. The configuration file named after the first regular
expression that matches
.I "command [args]"
is passed to
.BR grcat "."
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B  \-e  \-\-stderr
Redirect standard error through
.BR grcat "."
Unless
.B \-s
is also given, this cancels the automatic redirection of standard output.
.TP
.B  \-s  \-\-stdout
Redirect standard output through
.BR grcat ","
even when
.B \-e
is selected. Used to colourise both streams together.
.TP
.B  \-c \fIname\fB  \-\-config=\fIname\fR
Use
.I name
as the
.BR grcat
configuration file, bypassing the
.I grc.conf
scan.
.TP
.B  \-\-colour=\fIword\fR
.I word
is one of
.IR on ,
.IR off ,
or
.IR auto "."
.B \-\-colour=on
always colourises.
.B \-\-colour=off
runs
.I command
without colourising.
.B \-\-colour=auto
colourises only when standard output is a tty. When the option is absent the
default is
.IR auto "."
.TP
.B  \-\-pty
Run
.I command
in a pseudoterminal so that programs which buffer differently or disable colour
when not attached to a tty still produce tty-style output (experimental).
.TP
.B  \-\-
Stop option scanning; the following argument is treated as the command even if
it begins with a dash.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR grcat "(1)"
.PP
Upstream grc: https://github.com/garabik/grc
.PP
grcrs: https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/grcrs
