.TH GRCAT 1 "2026-07-13" "grcrs" "Generic Colouriser 1.13"
.SH NAME
grcat \- read from standard input, colourise it, and write to standard output
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B grcat
.I "configuration"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I "configuration"
is the name of a configuration file. The following directories are searched for
it, in order:
.RS
.nf
$XDG_DATA_HOME/grc/    (default ~/.local/share/grc/)
$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/grc/  (default ~/.config/grc/)
~/.grc/
/usr/local/share/grc/
/usr/share/grc/
/opt/homebrew/share/grc/
.fi
.RE
.PP
The search path also includes the empty prefix, so an absolute or relative
configuration file name is honoured as given. The first existing file wins.
.PP
.BR grcat
reads standard input line by line, applies the colours described in the
configuration file, and writes to standard output. Undecodable input bytes
round-trip unchanged, so colourising never corrupts non-UTF-8 output.
.PP
A configuration file consists of entries, one per regexp, separated by lines
whose first character is non-alphanumeric (except #). Lines beginning with # or
empty lines are ignored. Each entry consists of several lines of the form
.I keyword=value
where keyword is one of:
.BR regexp ,
.BR colours ,
.BR command ,
.BR concat ,
.BR skip ,
.BR replace ,
.BR count "."
Only
.BR regexp
is mandatory, but it is of little use without at least a
.BR colours
or
.BR command
keyword.
.TP
.I regexp
The regular expression to match.
.TP
.I colours
A list of colours separated by commas (one colour per regexp group, or a single
colour for the whole match). Recognised tokens include the standard colour and
attribute names (
.BR red ,
.BR bold ,
.BR on_blue ,
.BR bright_cyan ,
.BR italic ,
.BR underline ,
.BR previous ,
.BR unchanged ,
.BR none ,
.BR default ")"
or a quoted "..." literal unescaped like a Python string. Both
.B colours
and the US spelling
.B colour
/
.B color
are accepted.
.TP
.I command
A command to be executed when the regexp matches. Its output is mixed with
normal stdout; use a redirector ( >/dev/null ) to suppress it.
.TP
.I concat
Concatenate the named stream so multi-line output can be colourised as a unit.
.TP
.I replace
The regular expression match is replaced by the value. Preceding regular
expressions are evaluated against the original text; following regular
expressions are evaluated against the replaced text.
.TP
.I skip
.BR yes
or
.BR no "."
If yes, the matched line is skipped and not displayed. Default is no.
.TP
.I count
One of
.BR once ,
.BR more ,
.BR stop ,
.BR block ,
.BR unblock ,
or
.BR previous "."
.RS
.TP
.BR once
Colour only the first occurrence, then continue with other regexps.
.TP
.BR more
Colour every occurrence in the line (the default).
.TP
.BR stop
Colour the match, then move to the next line, ignoring later regexps.
.TP
.BR block
Begin colouring subsequent lines with this block's colour until an
.BR unblock "."
.TP
.BR unblock
End the block started by
.BR block "."
.TP
.BR previous
Reuse the previous line's colour state for this match.
.RE
.PP
Regular expressions are evaluated from top to bottom, allowing nested and
overlapping expressions.
.SH OPTIONS
None.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR grc "(1)"
.PP
Upstream grc: https://github.com/garabik/grc
.PP
grcrs: https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/grcrs
